Update Eulers_Formula.mdx (#4801)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/6_Advanced/Eulers_Formula.mdx

## Introduction

> A planar graph is a graph that can be drawn on a plane without any edges crossing. In other words, it can be embedded in the plane such that no two edges intersect except at their endpoints. Planar graphs can be represented in a two-dimensional space without overlaps between edges.

Reviewer: third sentence is redundant

<Resources>
    <Resource
        source="MIT"

>         title="    MIT Course Notes"

Reviewer: weird formatting

        url="https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/104426/6-042j-spring-2010/contents/readings/MIT6_042JS10_chap12.pdf"
        
    >
        6.024J course notes
    </Resource>
    <Resource
        source="Wiki"
        title="Planar Graph"
        url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planar_graph"
    >
        Wiki Definition
    </Resource>
    <Resource
        source="Rutgers"
        title="Planar Graph"
        url="https://sites.math.rutgers.edu/~sk1233/courses/graphtheory-F11/planar.pdf"
    />
    
</Resources>

## Euler's Formula

Euler's Formula states that any correct embedding of a connected planar graph satistfies:-

>          <center><h1>V − E + F = 2</h1></center>

Reviewer: use double dollar signs for latex

> Where V is the no of vertices, E is the number of edges and F is the number of faces.

Reviewer: use latex for these variables

edges, $V$ is the number of vertices, and $C$ is the number of connected
components.

Notice how $F$ in our planar graph is equal to $1 + R + A$, where $R$ is the
number of river segments and $A$ is the answer to the query. This means we must
subtract $R + 1$ from $F$ to get $A$.

Since the whole river is a big connected component, we can just check whether
the river touches the bounding rectangle to determine $C$.

Finding $E$, $V$, and $R$ is a lot more complicated though.

### Finding $E$, $V$, and $R$

To find $E$, $V$, and $R$, we can use a data structure that can handle 2D range
queries efficiently.

However, the coordinates of the grid can get very large, so a simple 2D BIT or
segment tree won't work here.

To work around this, we can either use a 2D BIT with coordinate compression or a
persistent segment tree. See the sections on
[offline 2D sum queries](/plat/2DRQ#2d-offline-sum-queries) or
[persistent segment trees](/adv/persistent) for more details.

## Implementation

With a persistent segment tree.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

**Memory Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

```cpp

> #include "rainbow.h"

Reviewer: rainbow.h?

#include <bits/stdc++.h>

> #define FOR(i, x, y) for (int i = x; i < y; i++)

Reviewer: no macros

using namespace std;

> const int MAXN = 2e5, MAXSEG = (6e5 + 9) * 19 + 1;

Reviewer: maxseg?

		int mid = (l + r) / 2;
		return query(a, b, left_c[node], l, mid) +
		       query(a, b, right_c[node], mid + 1, r);
	}
} vertices, edges_horiz, edges_vert, rivers;

int mx_r, mn_r, mx_c, mn_c;

void add_river(int x, int y) {
	vertices.add(x, y);
	vertices.add(x + 1, y);
	vertices.add(x, y + 1);
	vertices.add(x + 1, y + 1);
	edges_horiz.add(x, y);
	edges_horiz.add(x + 1, y);
	edges_vert.add(x, y);
	edges_vert.add(x, y + 1);
	rivers.add(x, y);
}

void init(int R, int C, int sr, int sc, int M, char *S) {
	add_river(sr, sc);
	mx_r = mn_r = sr;
	mx_c = mn_c = sc;
	FOR(i, 0, M) {
		if (S[i] == 'N') sr--;
		if (S[i] == 'E') sc++;
		if (S[i] == 'S') sr++;
		if (S[i] == 'W') sc--;
		add_river(sr, sc);
		mx_r = max(mx_r, sr);
		mn_r = min(mn_r, sr);
		mx_c = max(mx_c, sc);
		mn_c = min(mn_c, sc);
	}
	vertices.build();
	edges_horiz.build();
	edges_vert.build();
	rivers.build();
}

int colour(int ar, int ac, int br, int bc) {
	int E =
	    edges_horiz.query(ar + 1, br, ac, bc) + edges_vert.query(ar, br, ac + 1, bc);
	int V = vertices.query(ar + 1, br, ac + 1, bc);
	int R = rivers.query(ar, br, ac, bc);
	int C = (ar >= mn_r || br <= mx_r || ac >= mn_c || bc <= mx_c ? 1 : 2);

> 	return E - V + C - R;

Reviewer: use lowercase variable names

}

```

## Example 2

<Problems problems="e2" />

> # Explanation 

Reviewer: why is this h1

## Introduction

A planar graph is a graph that can be drawn on a plane without any edges crossing. In other words, it can be embedded in the plane such that no two edges intersect except at their endpoints.

<Resources>
    <Resource
        source="MIT"
        title="MIT Course Notes"
        url="https://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/104426/6-042j-spring-2010/contents/readings/MIT6_042JS10_chap12.pdf"

    >
        6.024J course notes
    </Resource>
    <Resource
        source="Wiki"
        title="Planar Graph"
        url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planar_graph"
    >
        Wiki Definition
    </Resource>
    <Resource
        source="Rutgers"
        title="Planar Graph"
        url="https://sites.math.rutgers.edu/~sk1233/courses/graphtheory-F11/planar.pdf"
    />

</Resources>

## Euler's Formula

Euler's Formula states that any correct embedding of a connected planar graph satistfies:-

    <center>     $$ V − E + F = 2 $$  </center>

$$ V = Vertices $$

$$ E = Edges $$

> $$ F = Faces $$

Reviewer: do you...check how this looks in the markdown renderer

Author: Yeah I will change it.

Author: Any other changes?

Reviewer: we'll see

## Example 1

<Problems problems="e1" />
## Explanation

### Intuition

> In this problem, we're asked to count the number of contiguous areas of cells on
> several flat rectangles. Such areas are separated by river segments and
> rectangle boundaries.
> 
> Where else do we count the number of areas on a flat surface?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this problem, we're given a 2D grid with a river segment (path) running through it. Our task is to count the number of contiguous areas of non-river cells on $Q$ subrectangles in this grid.

That's the definition of a planar graph! How can we calculate the number of segments on this plane?
```

wording is confusing on this part. it might be better to not restate the problem at all

Notice how the resulting graph is planar, so we can apply Euler's formula.

### Applying Euler's Formula

For a planar graph, Euler's formula is given as $F = E - V + 1 + C$, where $F$
is the number of faces (including the background face), $E$ is the number of
edges, $V$ is the number of vertices, and $C$ is the number of connected
components.

Notice how $F$ in our planar graph is equal to $1 + R + A$, where $R$ is the
number of river segments and $A$ is the answer to the query. This means we must
subtract $R + 1$ from $F$ to get $A$.

Since the whole river is a big connected component, we can just check whether
the river touches the bounding rectangle to determine $C$.

Finding $E$, $V$, and $R$ is a lot more complicated though.

### Finding $E$, $V$, and $R$

To find $E$, $V$, and $R$, we can use a data structure that can handle 2D range
queries efficiently.

However, the coordinates of the grid can get very large, so a simple 2D BIT or
segment tree won't work here.

To work around this, we can either use a 2D BIT with coordinate compression or a
persistent segment tree. See the sections on
[offline 2D sum queries](/plat/2DRQ#2d-offline-sum-queries) or

> [persistent segment trees](/adv/persistent) for more details.

Reviewer 2: would be useful to tell the user why we need 2d range queries.

also you don't need to split this into another section.

## Implementation

With a persistent segment tree.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

> **Memory Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```cpp

> const int MAXN = 2e5, MAXSEGMENT = (6e5 + 9) * 19 + 1;

Reviewer 2: separate with underscore: `MAX_N`

int cnt = 1, segtree[MAXSEGMENT], left_c[MAXSEGMENT], right_c[MAXSEGMENT];

> struct Segtree {

Reviewer 2: can you use the one from the module & [codesnip](https://usaco.guide/general/working-mdx#code-blocks-and-code-snippets) it?

		if (S[i] == 'S') sr++;
		if (S[i] == 'W') sc--;
		add_river(sr, sc);
		mx_r = max(mx_r, sr);
		mn_r = min(mn_r, sr);
		mx_c = max(mx_c, sc);
		mn_c = min(mn_c, sc);
	}
	vertices.build();
	edges_horiz.build();
	edges_vert.build();
	rivers.build();
}

int colour(int ar, int ac, int br, int bc) {
	int e =
	    edges_horiz.query(ar + 1, br, ac, bc) + edges_vert.query(ar, br, ac + 1, bc);
	int v = vertices.query(ar + 1, br, ac + 1, bc);
	int r = rivers.query(ar, br, ac, bc);
	int c = (ar >= mn_r || br <= mx_r || ac >= mn_c || bc <= mx_c ? 1 : 2);
	return e - v + c - r;
}
```

## Example 2

<Problems problems="e2" />

## Explanation

This problem involves a 2D grid. The code tracks connected region of points using heights. We will use Disjoint Set Union (DSU). As we process points by increasing height, we merge them into regions and update the answer based on their size. The logic here mirrors an application of Euler's formula for planar graphs, where we maintain
boundaries (faces) as we mege points (vertices) and check their connectivity (edges).
## Implementation

With Euler's Formula

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N^2 \log N)$

**Memory Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N^2)$

> ```cpp

Reviewer 2: ok this entire code block needs to be rewritten -- we want the code to be as readable /easy-to-understand as possible. so this means removing templates/macros

const int xd[4] = {1, 0, -1, 0}, yd[4] = {0, 1, 0, -1};

template <int SZ> struct DSU {
    int par[SZ], sz[SZ], measure[SZ];
    vi comp[SZ];
    DSU() { F0R(i, SZ) par[i] = i, sz[i] = 1, measure[i] = 1; }

>     bool valid(int b, int c) { return b >= 0 && b < N && c >= 0 && c < N; }

Reviewer: you didn't touch this code did you

Author: I didn't. I thought my job was to just explain it.

Author: Just for the second example
